---
title: "BritPay: A State-Owned Payment Processor?"
heading: "BritPay: A State-Owned Payment Processor?"
excerpt: A brief argument that Britain should create a state-owned payment processor.
---

<p>What if I told you there was a policy that could save you money, bring in revenue for the government and boost our fintech sector?</p>

<p>Introducing "BritPay", my vision for a state-owned payment processor to replace Visa and Mastercard, with a nice patriotic sounding name to (hopefully) get you on board.</p>

<h3>The Problem</h3>
<hr>
<p>Every time you buy something with your card - whether online or offline, credit or debit - you are most likely sending a little bit of money over to America every time you do so, even if you don't realise it.</p>
<p>Visa and Mastercard account for 95% of all transactions. The remaining 5% will be mostly taken up by Stripe and PayPal, both also American. From what I can gather, the average transaction fee is about 1.5%. That means every time you purchase something, 1.5% of your total cost sails the sea over to the United States.</p>
<p>This is bad enough on its own, it's even more so when you realise how much Visa and Mastercard exploit their market share.</p>
<p>According to the British Retail Consortium, card transactions accounted for 85% of all spending made in retail stores. As people continue to ditch cash, this number will only keep growing.</p>
<p>They also say that fees paid to banks and processors rose by 25% in 2023, increasing the cost of doing business by £380 million. To be clear, this also includes fees by banks. Visa and Mastercard aren't quite off the hook yet, however, as the Payment Systems Regulator says they raised their core scheme and processing fees by 25% from 2017 to 2023.</p>

David Geale: PSR Managing Director:

<blockquote>

<p>“We have found that there is a lack of competition in the market, and evidence that Mastercard and Visa might have been able to charge UK businesses millions of pounds more than they would in a properly competitive market, impacting on their ability to invest and grow.</p>
<br><br>

<p>The confusing information Mastercard and Visa make available to acquirers and merchants contributes to poorer market outcomes through raising their costs of dealing with this overly complex information.”</p>

</blockquote>
That quote makes it clear that Visa and Mastercard are exploiting their market dominance to unjustly raise the fees they charge, which in turn raise the price of the stuff we buy.

<h3>The Solution</h3>
<hr>
<p>So you know the problem. These companies make billions of pounds every year by charging us fees when we buy stuff. That's not a bad thing by itself, but they leverage their status to unjustly raise their fees and leave UK consumers footing the bill. To make matters worse, all these payment processors are American-owned and so while the government will get some money from tax revenue, it is inevitable that a portion of this money is shipped overseas to America, never to be seen again.</p>

<p>This is where my idea for BritPay comes in. It fits in with Labour's current patriotic branding turn, slotting neatly between Great British Railways and Great British Energy.</p>

<p>My solution is simple, what if we just... did it ourselves? Crazy, I know. An especially big ask for a country with a history of inept governments. But if Brazil can create PIX, then we can create BritPay.</p>

<p>Owned by the government, we would be able to set the fees as we'd like. Another lever to pull when dealing with the economy. Lower the fees to help out businesses and consumers, increase them to bring more revenue to the treasury. We'd keep it all.</p>

<p>The new organisation would have to be created via an Act of Parliament. Once done, it would take a few years to be complete and ready to go online. When Brazil created their state-owned system, it took roughly 2 - 3 years.</p>

<p>From then on you could just mandate that all new debit and credit cards issued by banks must use BritPay.</p>

<p>It won't be as simple as I lay out here, I'm sure, but the main point is that we could get it done. "You can just do things," as the new internet mantra goes.</p>

<h3>Final Thoughts</h3>
<hr>
<p>For decades now, government interference with the "free-market" has been completely derided. Pro-business advocates make the point that private companies run things better and more efficiently. That may be true in some scenarios, but it does not mean we have to sacrifice everything at the altar of the free-market.</p>

<p>China has led the world in state-capitalism. Even America under a Republican administration has purchased 10% of Intel. Offshoring is out. Protectionism is back in. It's no good adhering to an ideology of shipping all your money overseas.</p>

<p>Technology is a part of national security. The ability to control the hardware and software of the world has seen us ditch Huawei as the builders of our 5G infrastructure for being Chinese. The United States is investing billions into on-shoring chip manufacturing, along with ungodly amounts of money being poured into AI.</p>

<p>Having a payment processor isn't going to solve our national security crisis overnight, but the ability to transact fees independently could prove to be extremely valuable in the future. Not to mention the financial benefits I spelled out earlier.</p>

<p>I hope this somewhat convinces you. Or at least gets you to think more about the role of technology with regards to future national security. I'll probably write more articles in the future on topics like these and explore times other countries tried to go independent, such as France with Minitel.</p>

<p>For now though, I hope you enjoyed my first ever article.</p>

Sources:

<ul>
<li><a href="https://brc.org.uk/news-and-events/news/corporate-affairs/2024/cards-may-be-king-but-cash-remains-crucial/">British Retail Consortium</a></li>
<li><a href="https://www.psr.org.uk/news-and-updates/latest-news/news/psr-finds-market-isn-t-working-well-for-card-scheme-and-processing-services/">Payment Systems Regulator</a></li>
<li><a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pix_(payment_system)">PIX</a></li>
<li><a href="https://www.psr.org.uk/publications/market-reviews/mr22110-market-review-of-card-scheme-and-processing-fees-final-report/">PSR - Fees Increase</a></li>
<li><a href="https://www.merchantsavvy.co.uk/uk-credit-card-statistics/">Merchant Savvy</a></li>
</ul>
